Updates to uattributes and MQTT5 specifications (#204)
eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec: basics/uattributes.adoc

|`id`
|link:uuid.adoc[UUID]
|yes
a|

> [.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-attributes-id~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]

Reviewer: I wonder if this really is the right place to specify this requirement. It seems quite unclear, where and at what time this would need to be verified. Maybe it would be better to define this in the Transport layer API spec? There we could require that all messages that are sent via a transport must have valid attributes according to the UAttributes spec and we could also define what needs to be done with messages received that are not compliant, e.g. ignore them.

I guess that would also reduce the number of spec items significantly and make it much easier to implement and test the requirements.

WDYT?

Reviewer: Sure, but may I at least suggest to turn them into design spec items (using the `dsn` type instead of `req`) as these are not really user level requirements but are the outcome of having thought about how to make it possible ...

Author: I guess it depends on what your definitions of feature vs user vs design vs architecture requirements are.  I got the following response from chatGPT:

1. *Feature Requirements:* These are specific functionalities or capabilities that a product or system should have. Feature requirements describe what the product should do or the tasks it should perform to meet user needs or business objectives. They focus on the desired outcomes or features that users expect from the product.

2. *User Requirements:* User requirements capture the needs, expectations, and goals of the end-users or stakeholders who will interact with the product. They define the user's perspective, including their desired functionalities, usability, user experience, and any specific constraints or preferences they may have.

3. *Design Requirements:* Design requirements focus on the visual and interactive aspects of the product. They specify how the product should look, feel, and behave from a user interface (UI) and user experience (UX) perspective. Design requirements may include guidelines for layout, color schemes, typography, navigation, and other visual elements that contribute to the overall design aesthetics and usability.

4. *Architecture Requirements:* Architecture requirements pertain to the underlying structure, components, and technical aspects of the product's system architecture. They define the high-level design principles, performance criteria, scalability, security, integration requirements, and other technical considerations necessary for the product's development and deployment. Architecture requirements guide the development team in designing a robust and scalable system that meets the desired technical specifications.

If we stick with design meaning UI/UX above, we should change the various requirements to `arch` . 

Having said that we do need to agree on definitions of feature vs user vs design vs architecture, my vote is using the definitions above.

Reviewer: OFT uses [this definition](https://github.com/itsallcode/openfasttrace/blob/main/doc/user_guide.md#specification-item-artifact-type) where, according to my understanding, `dsn` does not refer to UX requirements ...

Author: done

--
Every message *MUST* have a unique message identifier. The timestamp contained in the UUID is used as the message's creation time.
--

|`priority`
|link:qos.adoc[UPriority]
|no
a|
The QoS level that this message should be processed/delivered with. If not specified explicitly, the link:qos.adoc#default-priority[default priority level] is assumed.
[.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-attributes-priority~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> * *MUST* have a priority attribute.

Reviewer: just two lines above, we say that it does not need to have one, aren't we? I would also suggest to require the attribute to have a value instead of the message having the attribute. FMPOV a message always has a _priority_ attribute, the attribute just doesn't always have (to have) a value set explicitly, and thus assume a default value.

I would suggest something like:
```
[.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-attributes-priority~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
A consumer *MUST* assume a message to have the link:qos.adoc#default-priority[default priority] if not set explicitly.
--

Author: changed

--
|`ttl`
|`unsigned integer`
|no
a|

> The amount of time (in milliseconds) after which this message is no longer delivered/processed.
> [.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-attributes-ttl~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
> --
> * *MUST* have a TTL attribute.
> --
> [.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-attributes-ttl-timeout~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
> --
> * The message *MUST* expire if the current time is greater than the sum of the message's creation time and the TTL value.
> --

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The amount of time (in milliseconds) after which this message is no longer delivered/processed.
[.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-attributes-ttl-timeout~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
A consumer *MUST NOT* process an expired message. A message is expired if the TTL is > `0` and the consumer's current time is _after_ the message's creation time _plus_ its TTL.
--
[.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-attributes-ttl~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
A consumer *MUST* not consider a message expired if it has a TTL value of `0`.
--

```

stem:[t_{current} > t_{id} + ttl]

|`traceparent`
|https://w3c.github.io/trace-context/#traceparent-header[W3C Trace Context Level 3, traceparent]
|no
a|
A tracing identifier to use for correlating messages across the system. Intended to be compatible with https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/main/cloudevents/extensions/distributed-tracing.md[CloudEvents distributed tracing extension].

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-attributes-traceparent~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
* *MAY* contain traceparent attribute.
--

|`payload format`
|link:upayloadformat.adoc[UPayloadFormat]
|no
a|The format of the payload (data).
[.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-attributes-payload-format~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> * *MAY* contain payload format attribute.

Reviewer 2: I would have assumed this is necessary, even if just to write that it's unspecified.

Also according to the .proto it's [not optional](https://github.com/eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec/blob/8801cc68be1356df6e861e56aa824fbdad853d54/up-core-api/uprotocol/v1/uattributes.proto#L66).

Reviewer: It is optional, all message/enum typed fields in proto3 are per se optional, i.e. they do not need to be marked with the `optional` modifier.
For an enum, if no value is set, the enum's default value is assumed.

|`type`
|yes
a| 
[.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-attributes-publish-type~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
*MUST* be set to `UMESSAGE_TYPE_PUBLISH`.
--

|`source`
|yes
a|A link:uri.adoc[UUri] representing the topic that this message is published to.

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-attributes-publish-source~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--
* The UUri's `resource_id` *MUST* be set to a value in range `[0x8000, 0xFFFE]`.
--

|`sink`

> |no

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|no (see Description)
```

Highlight that it's _usually_ no, but some details need be understood.

a|A link:uri.adoc[UUri] representing the receiver of this published message. This information is 

> only required when we are sending the published event between devices through the streamer, publishers are not required to populate this information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
only required when we are sending the published event between devices through a streamer. A uEntity sending a Publish message is not required to populate this information.
```

Clarification ideas to separate a typical uE sending a publish message vs a streamer sending a publish message
